Add blog post for Provision volumes from cross namespace data sources (#37628)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2022-12-6-cross-namespace-data-sources-alpha.md

---
layout: blog

> title: "Kubernetes v1.26: alpha support for cross namespace data sources"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Kubernetes v1.26: Alpha support for cross-namespace storage data sources"
```
?

date: 2022-12-6
slug: cross-namespace-data-sources-alpha-redesigned
---

**Authors:**
Takafumi Takahashi (Hitachi Vantara)

> Kubernetes v1.26, released earlier this month, introduced an enable the usage of
> cross namespace volume data source to allow you to specify a namespace
> in the `dataSourceRef` field of a PersistentVolumeClaim.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes v1.26, released earlier this month, introduced an alpha feature that
lets you specify a data source for a PersistentVolumeClaim, even where the source
data belong to a different namespace.
With the new feature enabled, you specify a namespace in the `dataSourceRef` field of
a new PersistentVolumeClaim. Once Kubernetes checks that access is OK, the new
PersistentVolume can populate its data from the storage source specified in that other
namespace.

```

Before Kubernetes v1.26, by using `AnyVolumeDataSource` feature,

> users can provision volumes from data source in the same namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you could already provision new volumes from a data source in the **same**
namespace.
```

However, it only works for the data source in the same namespace,

> therefore users can't provision a persisten volume claim

Reviewer: ```suggestion
therefore users couldn't provision a PersistentVolume with a claim
```
?

in one namespace from a data source in other namespace.

> To solve this problem, Kubernetes v1.26 adds a new namespace alpha field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To solve this problem, Kubernetes v1.26 added a new alpha `namespace` field
```

> to `dataSourceRef` field in PersistentVolumeClaim API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to `dataSourceRef` field in the PersistentVolumeClaim API.
```

## How it works

Once the csi-provisioner finds that a data source is specified with a `dataSourceRef` that
has a non-empty namespace name,
it checks all reference grants within the namespace that's specified by the`.spec.dataSourceRef.namespace`
field of the PersistentVolumeClaim, in order to see if access to the data source is allowed.
If any ReferenceGrant allows access, the csi-provisioner provisions a volume from the data source.

## Trying it out

The following things are required to use cross namespace volume provisioning:

> * Enable the `AnyVolumeDataSource` and `CrossNamespaceVolumeDataSource` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) for the kube-apiserver, kube-controller-manager

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Enable the `AnyVolumeDataSource` and `CrossNamespaceVolumeDataSource`
  [feature gates](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) for the kube-apiserver and kube-controller-manager
```

* Install a CRD for the specific `VolumeSnapShot` controller
* Install the CSI Provisioner controller and enable the `CrossNamespaceVolumeDataSource` feature gate
* Install the CSI driver
* Install a CRD for ReferenceGrants

## Putting it all together

To see how this works, you can install the sample and try it out.
This sample do to create PVC in dev namespace from VolumeSnapshot in prod namespace.
That is a simple example. For real world use, you might want to use a more complex approach.

> ### Prerequisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Assumptions for this example {#example-assumptions}
```

> * Kubernetes cluster is being deployed with `AnyVolumeDataSource` and `CrossNamespaceVolumeDataSource` features enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Your Kubernetes cluster was deployed with `AnyVolumeDataSource` and `CrossNamespaceVolumeDataSource` feature gates enabled
```

* There are two namespaces, dev and prod
* CSI driver is being deployed

> * There is an acquired VolumeSnapShot named of "new-snapshot-demo" on prod

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* There is an existing VolumeSnapshot named `new-snapshot-demo` in the _prod_ namespace
* ```

> * ReferenceGrants CRD is being deployed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The ReferenceGrant CRD (from the Gateway API project) is already deployed
```

> ### Add referencegrants permission to CSI Provisioner RBAC
> 
> Access to referencegrants is only needed when the CSI driver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Grant ReferenceGrants read permission to the CSI Provisioner

Access to ReferenceGrants is only needed when the CSI driver
```

has the `CrossNamespaceVolumeDataSource` controller capability.

> Therefore, external-provisioner adds "get", "list", "watch"
> permissions for "referencegrants" on "gateway.networking.k8s.io".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this example, the external-provisioner needs **get**, **list**, and **watch**
permissions for `referencegrants` (API group `gateway.networking.k8s.io`).
```

```yaml
  - apiGroups: ["gateway.networking.k8s.io"]
    resources: ["referencegrants"]
    verbs: ["get", "list", "watch"]
```

> ### The CSI Provisioner controller and enable the CrossNamespaceVolumeDataSource feature gate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Enable the CrossNamespaceVolumeDataSource feature gate for the CSI Provisioner
```

> Add `--feature-gates=CrossNamespaceVolumeDataSource=true` to csi-provisioner container

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add `--feature-gates=CrossNamespaceVolumeDataSource=true` to the csi-provisioner command line.
For example, use this manifest snippet to redefine the container:
```

```yaml
      - args:
        - -v=5
        - --csi-address=/csi/csi.sock
        - --feature-gates=Topology=true
        - --feature-gates=CrossNamespaceVolumeDataSource=true
        image: csi-provisioner:latest
        imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
        name: csi-provisioner
```

> ### Create a ReferenceGrant. Here's a manifest for an example ReferenceGrant.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create a ReferenceGrant

Here's a manifest for an example ReferenceGrant:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: ReferenceGrant
metadata:
  name: allow-prod-pvc
  namespace: prod
spec:
  from:
  - group: ""
    kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
    namespace: dev
  to:
  - group: snapshot.storage.k8s.io
    kind: VolumeSnapshot
    name: new-snapshot-demo
```

### Create a PersistentVolumeClaim by using cross namespace data source

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: example-pvc
  namespace: dev
spec:
  storageClassName: csi-hostpath-sc
  accessModes:
  - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1Gi
  dataSourceRef:
    apiGroup: snapshot.storage.k8s.io
    kind: VolumeSnapshot
    name: new-snapshot-demo
    namespace: prod
  volumeMode: Filesystem
```

> 

Reviewer: Any summary here?

For example: “Kubernetes creates a PersistentVolume and the CSI driver populates it with data from the snapshot”.

## How can I learn more?

The enhancement proposal,
[Provision volumes from cross-namespace snapshots](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-storage/3294-provision-volumes-from-cross-namespace-snapshots), includes lots of detail about the history and technical implementation of this feature.

Please get involved by joining the Kubernetes SIG Storage to help us enhance this
feature. There are a lot of good ideas already and we'd be thrilled to have more!

## Acknowledgment

It takes a wonderful group to make wonderful software.
Thanks are due to everyone who has contributed to the CrossNamespaceVolumeDataSouce feature,

> especially (in alphabetical order) Tim Hockin, Masaki Kimura, Michelle Au and Xing Yang.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
especially (in alphabetical order) Michelle Au, Tim Hockin, Masaki Kimura, and Xing Yang.
```

Author: Changed description method. Thank you for your advice.

> It’s been a joy to work with y’all on this.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
It’s been a joy to work with y'all on this.
```
The static site generator may turn this into a different character at render time.

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes v1.26: Alpha support for cross-namespace storage data sources"

> date: 2022-12-6

Reviewer 2: @ttakahashi21 Please change the publication date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2023-01-02
```

Please change the path `content/en/blog/_posts/2022-12-6-cross-namespace-data-sources-alpha.md` to match

Author: I also changed to file name of "content/en/blog/_posts/2023-01-02-cross-namespace-data-sources-alpha.md".

slug: cross-namespace-data-sources-alpha-redesigned
---

**Authors:**
Takafumi Takahashi (Hitachi Vantara)
Kubernetes v1.26, released earlier this month, introduced an alpha feature that
lets you specify a data source for a PersistentVolumeClaim, even where the source
data belong to a different namespace.
With the new feature enabled, you specify a namespace in the `dataSourceRef` field of
a new PersistentVolumeClaim. Once Kubernetes checks that access is OK, the new
PersistentVolume can populate its data from the storage source specified in that other
namespace.

> Before Kubernetes v1.26, by using `AnyVolumeDataSource` feature,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before Kubernetes v1.26, provided your cluster had the `AnyVolumeDataSource` feature enabled,
```

you could already provision new volumes from a data source in the **same**
namespace.

> However, it only works for the data source in the same namespace,

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
However, that only worked for the data source in the same namespace,
```

therefore users couldn't provision a PersistentVolume with a claim
in one namespace from a data source in other namespace.
To solve this problem, Kubernetes v1.26 added a new alpha `namespace` field
to `dataSourceRef` field in PersistentVolumeClaim the API.

## How it works

Once the csi-provisioner finds that a data source is specified with a `dataSourceRef` that
has a non-empty namespace name,
it checks all reference grants within the namespace that's specified by the`.spec.dataSourceRef.namespace`
field of the PersistentVolumeClaim, in order to see if access to the data source is allowed.
If any ReferenceGrant allows access, the csi-provisioner provisions a volume from the data source.

## Trying it out

The following things are required to use cross namespace volume provisioning:

> * Enable the `AnyVolumeDataSource` and `CrossNamespaceVolumeDataSource` [feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) for the kube-apiserver and kube-controller-manager

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
* Enable the `AnyVolumeDataSource` and `CrossNamespaceVolumeDataSource` [feature gates](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) for the kube-apiserver and kube-controller-manager
```

    name: new-snapshot-demo
```

### Create a PersistentVolumeClaim by using cross namespace data source

Kubernetes creates a PersistentVolumeClaim on dev and the CSI driver populates
the PersistentVolume used on dev from snapshots on prod.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: example-pvc
  namespace: dev
spec:
  storageClassName: csi-hostpath-sc
  accessModes:
  - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1Gi
  dataSourceRef:
    apiGroup: snapshot.storage.k8s.io
    kind: VolumeSnapshot
    name: new-snapshot-demo
    namespace: prod
  volumeMode: Filesystem
```

## How can I learn more?

The enhancement proposal,
[Provision volumes from cross-namespace snapshots](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-storage/3294-provision-volumes-from-cross-namespace-snapshots), includes lots of detail about the history and technical implementation of this feature.

Please get involved by joining the [Kubernetes Storage Special Interest Group (SIG)](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage)
to help us enhance this feature.
There are a lot of good ideas already and we'd be thrilled to have more!

> ## Acknowledgment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Acknowledgments
```
